An MVT file is a sequence of text lines like the CSV format (see its docs)
with some small changes to facilitate reading it and editing it by hand.

Apart from comments (with a semi-colon in column one and continuing to the end
of the line), MVT files have the following format:

       start-file <numer> <denom> [soloing]
       <tracks>*
       end-file

where <numer>/<denom> is the (fixed) time signature of the file (e.g. 4/4 or
3/8).  Each beat is divided into 960 parts, and each bar is divided into
<numer> beats.  (The <denom> is only used for musical notation.  It should be
a power of 2, and <denom>/4 indicates how many beats per notation quarter
note.)  Overall, the piece timing starts at bar 1 beat 1 unit 0, then goes to
bar 1 beat 1 unit 959.  Next comes bar 1 beat 2 unit 0, and so on up to bar 1
beat <numer> unit 959.  Next comes bar 2 beat 1 unit 0, etc.  (Note: it might
have been more elegant to use zero-origin throughout, but no self-respecting
musician counts a 4/4 bar as "0, 1, 2, 3," so that's that!)  The optional
"soloing" decoration indicates that tracks need a solo decoration to be heard.

Each <track> contains these text lines:

      start-track <name> [solo] [mute]
      <timed MIDI event>*
      end-track

where <name> is any string of characters in double quotes, and the optional
decoration of "solo" or "mute" indicates whether the track should be soloed or
muted (or both).

A <timed MIDI event> is of the form

      <location> <type> <field>*

where <location> is <bar>:<beat>:<unit> (usually with spaces to allow all the
semi-colons to line up).  The <type> is one of eleven values:

     note, sustain, volume, expression, wheel, control
     bend, after, program, tempo, meta 

The type "note" is for the combination of note-on and note-off events.  The
types "sustain", "volume", "wheel" and "expression" are controller events (for
controllers 64, 7, 1, and 11).  The type "control" is for the rest of the
controller events.  The type "bend" is for pitch bend, and "after" is for
channel aftertouch.  The type "program" is for program changes.  The type
"tempo" is for tempo changes. Finally, "meta" is for all remaining meta or
system events.

The <field>s that appear in a MIDI event depend on the type.  Each event is
considered to have a location and a type field.  Here are the others:

     note:  <channel> <pitch> <amount> <duration>
     bend:  <channel> <amount>
     sustain:  <channel> <value>
     volume:  <channel> <amount>
     expression:  <channel> <amount>
     wheel:  <channel> <amount>
     after:  <channel> <amount>
     control:  <channel> <controller name> <value>
     program:  <channel> <value>
     tempo:  <amount>
     meta:  <misc arguments> 

The <channel> is a number from 1 to 16 (unlike CSV).  The <pitch> is a note
name from C-1 to A9 with # and b for sharp and flat in the usual way, where
for example, Eb3 and D#3 are the same pitch.  The <amount> field is a numberic
value that varies according to the type: for a note, it is the velocity (from
0 to 127); for a bend, it is the amount to bend the pitch from -8192 to 8191
(unlike CSV); for the four controllers, it is the controller amount (from 0 to
127); for tempo it is the bpm amount.  (These fields are all called "amount"
because it will make sense to scale them or to increment them.)  The
<duration> field is of the form bar:beat:unit or beat:unit or just unit, where
the missing values are treated as 0.  The <value> field is a number from 0 to
127.  The <controller name> is a name listed in the file MIDIControllers.txt,
supplemented by "MIDI_controller_N" for any N between 0 and 127 that does not
appear in that list.  The events of type "meta" have <misc arguments> just
like in CSV, but with commas removed, and with the following exceptions:

  - Title_t is not used.  Tracks are given a title on the Start_track line
  - Time_signature is not used.  A file can only have one time signature.
  - Poly_aftertouch_c is not used. (I couldn't be bothered...)
  - The microsecond Tempo event is not used.  Instead "tempo" in bpm is used.

Here is an example MVT file (see the midi-file-basics in the doc/ area):

    start-file 4 4
    start-track "Close Encounters"
      1:1:0   meta Text_t "Sample for MIDIcsv Distribution"
      1:1:0   meta Copyright_t "This file is in the public domain"
      1:1:0   tempo 120.00
    end-track
    start-track "Track2"
      1:1:0   meta Instrument_name_t "Church Organ"
      1:1:0   program 2 19
      1:1:0   note 2  G5  81 2:0
      1:3:0   note 2  A5  81 2:0
      2:1:0   note 2  F5  81 2:0
      2:3:0   note 2  F4  81 2:0
      3:1:0   note 2  C5  81 2:0
    end-track
    end-file
